Kiva.org

Kiva is a non-profit based in San Francisco, CA, who provides microloans on five continents where traditional banking is not available. These funds go to helping individuals establish small businesses that can grow and become successful from small donations from people around the world. These individuals are able to easily pay back their loans (Kiva’s repayment rate is currently 98.84%) and can take small, incremental steps to financial success. There is little risk to lenders, who can pay as little as $25, and can receive that paid back to them, or re-lend it to the same or a different project.

Kiva.org relies on the good faith of others to make its product work and operates from a philosophy of sharing, so it is not surprising that all of their source code is open source. This presents several opportunities for contributing to an open source project that also benefits individuals around the world. 

There is robust evidence of developer interest across several Kiva projects, as evidenced by an active github account with many members, commits, and pull requests. There is user activity for my specific project within the past month. There is also evidence of user interest; Kiva’s broad impact includes 1,189,045 active lenders and 256 field partners, and have lent $573,467,050 to date. For my specific project, java users who wish to access Kiva’s data will be able to do so easily via the API translation I produce.

Documentation for the project is strong; on both Kiva’s build site as well as their Github account, there are clear, descriptive files that outline projects and point to their progress, track versions, issues, and pull requests. They also have manuals on their own site, and outline clearly what code of conduct they expect developers to follow. At this time, I am unable to evaluate the readability and maintainability of the source code itself, as I will not actually need it directly to create the client library for the API (the API itself is web-based). The outline of the API appears well-organized conceptually. The Java-specific project site (https://code.google.com/p/javakiva/) is sparse, but straightforward.

On Kiva’s build site, it outlines several open source projects currently underway. Kiva needs its REST API (found here http://build.kiva.org/api) translated into into other languages, one of which is Java. There has already been quite a bit of progress made toward building a Java client library, but the Statistics portion is missing. Since I am passionate about Kiva’s cause, as well as statistics, this would be a perfect foray for my first contribution to open source. I can use one of these sources (https://github.com/kiva/API/tree/master/code) to access the API, and then contribute to a client library in Java. Many pieces of the API have already been translated, but I could contribute by building the Statistics portion of the client library so that Java users can access statistics in Java.


R

R is a statistical computing language that is popular among Data Scientists and Analysts. It is free and open source; it is powerful for both computation as well as graphics. It began as an outgrowth of S, and now has an enthusiastic user base that encourages problem solving via open source. That is, users are encouraged to develop packages to solve the analytical problems they encounter and then share them with the community to make everyone’s life easier. There are currently 5,626 packages associated with R. One of the most popular is ggplot2, a graphics package that makes it easier for novice programmers to create vibrant graphs, tables, and charts.

Despite development of many helpful GUIs, R is still quite programming-based and therefore users of the language are “developers,” in a sense. There is copious developer (and user) interest; one study charted the explosion in popularity of R as compared to other analytic software over the past several years (http://r4stats.com/articles/popularity/). It is becoming de rigeur for data scientists and data analysts to possess competence in R rather than the proprietary SPSS and SAS. As users are developers, they are active in dozens if not hundreds of user groups across the world, creating a vibrant community.

In terms of ggplot2 specifically, it is the 3rd most popular package according to http://www.r-statistics.com/2013/06/top-100-r-packages-for-2013-jan-may/. On github, there are 30 active contributors for ggplot2 alone, and over 2,400 commits. There have been 970 pull requests, 16 currently open. It is safe to say that contributing to such a robust project would impact many users. 

Documentation for both R itself and ggplot2 in particular are thorough and accessible. The Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) serves as the repository for packages, provides manuals, and is the home to R source code. In github, the documentation is excellent, particularly for ggplot2. There is a ggplot2 specific mailing list that updates users on the developments within the project, and a website (www.ggplot2.org). Because documentation and source code live in only a few places, it is easy to keep track of progress of various projects.

R and ggplot2 both encourage good software engineering practices; the documentation walks through the setup for the development process. It also describes the elements of a good pull request, ensuring that developers will make their contributions carefully.

Since ggplot2 is already so popular and widely used, many open source contributions have already been made. Hadley Wickham, who developed ggplot2, describes a few ways in which one could contribute, a couple of them creative: host an intern, hire a graduate student. Software-based contributions include adding new features or contribute documentation. 

US Small Business Administration

The open data movement, related to the open source movement, is an attempt by the US government to create transparency regarding its operations and share data with the public. As all of this data is online and accessible, it has become popular with developers. “Open Government Hack” meetings are a popular Meetup group in most locations, and there is a growing community around working with government data and developing applications for its use. 

There is evidence of interest among direct users of the data, as well as the wider public. In the larger scheme, there are numerous news articles regarding the open data movement, debating its real transparency and ultimate effectiveness. That it is a highly politicized and visible issue only speaks to how important it is to the public. Direct consumers of the data include the government itself (for example, using Census and poverty data to in allocating funds). Private foundations may use it in much the same way. There are also scientific uses of the data; for example the US Geological Survey provides information about earthquakes.

In terms of developer interest, the open data movement has sparked many innovations. There are over 35 pages of projects and applications on this page (https://www.data.gov/applications), where developers have used open data to create something that the public can consume. Many of these applications are open source. One example is the “Did you feel it?” App, which uses USGS data combined with user reports to determine how far reaching an earthquake was felt. Additionally, there is a large “civic hacker” community(http://hackforchange.org/); in addition to the meetups mentioned above, there is much activity on github. 

The documentation for the open data movement is robust. It appears well organized, and each site clearly documents where to go to find data, as well as developer opportunities. Though it is distributed (as the government is huge, contains many agencies, and repositories cannot all exist in one place), Data.gov itself points to where the code for its various projects exists. The code itself (or REST APIs for the project I am interested in) are well-organized and readable. It is possible that there is variation from project to project since it is so distributed, but for my interests it is satisfactory.

In terms of best practices for software development, I was unable to find specifics regarding what the government expects from those using the code. They have very specific guidelines for how to use the data, but not how they expect applications or other projects to proceed.

The US Small Business Association (www.sba.gov), in addition to facilitating relationships between small business and cities, counties, and states, houses data regarding the websites for all of those cities, counties, and states. The website URL information is available in JSON or XML. My proposed project would be to write a library and demo program that parses data from JSON into java for the state websites, and the data they contain. This would use classes to better model the data contained in the sites. Java developers would then be able to use my contribution to access and transform the data more easily for their use.


